Okay, Dr. Bain, in the fall, you will have a
slightly different position at A&M. Would you
explain this, please? Yes. For the last four
years, I've had a joint appointment of director of
the Center for Energy and Mental Resources, which
was created by the Board of Regents to help provide
coordinate and develop energy-related programs
in teaching, research, and in public service.
That was in 1975. In 1977, Dr.
Dick Winerdi left the university for the private
sector, and I took over as acting director and then
director. I've been director for the last four
years. In the fall, I will be full-time director of
the center, and I will not have my formal
association with the Engineering Experiment
Station as its assistant director. I'd rather
have a tie with the Engineering Experiment
Station, but this was not my choosing. But that's
just the way the ball bounces. The Energy and
Mental Resources Program is, of course, very much
engineering-oriented. About $250,000 of our
about-million-dollar program is in
engineering, as a matter of fact. We feel like
we've helped develop engineer researchers, ag
researchers, history researchers. One of our
projects in the energy side of the house is the
collection of the German documents that were the
records of the German synthetic fuels programs.
During World War II, Germany, not having an
internal source of petroleum from natural
petroleum, had to rely on synthetic fuels. And
they were producing about 3 million barrels of
petroleum for lubricants and for jet fuels and
that sort of thing. That was their annual rate at
that time. No, monthly rate, I'm sorry. monthly
rate. In this country today we use about twice that
amount per day for transportation alone and we
have a very serious problem because we are very
dependent upon foreign producers of oil and we saw
what the OPEC embargo could do to this country in
1973. So the German documents program is one that
has a lot of involvement with the history
department. It has some involvement with the
technical side of the house and chemical
engineers advise us and that sort of thing. We feel
that Texas A&M has a very valuable resource here
for the rest of the country. These documents
contain records of problems that were
experienced in the production of synthetic
fuels, such as stress corrosion, hydrogen
embrittlement, catalyst poisoning, and that
sort of thing, that these records and their
actions taken to correct their problems would be
valuable to through the new synthetic fuels
industry of this country once we get going. You
think this synthetic fuels program is going to be,
first thing is the finding of certain, or what is
the status of it? Well, the windfall profits tax
had about $240 billion income
expected over the 10-year program. And of that,
$80 billion was assigned to development of the
synthetic fuels program in this country. And $17
billion of that are now in the hands of the
Synthetic Fuels Corporation, which is a
government entity established by Congress last
year. And they are currently, I guess you would
say, in the state of getting organized and having
projects transferred to them from the Department
of Energy. current administration of this
country is now phasing down the governmental
involvement in solar and conservation and that
sort of thing and feeling that the prices of energy
are affecting these developments and that
there's no need for the infusion of large dollars
into conservation and into solar energy that if
the economics are right that people will conserve
and they will develop solar energy. What
statistics do we have on whether people are
conserving or not? They are conserving. You can
see that in the use of gasoline in this country.
It's been reduced about 20%, actually. Now, this
is from conservation. It's also from use of more
efficient cars. more fuel efficient. The
manufacturers have finally gotten the word, and
Ford and General Motors are now producing
lightweight cars, and in a couple of years you
won't be able to buy a large car. This is sort of
forced conservation, but we need to force the
conservation because, as I said, we're using
close to six million barrels of liquid petroleum
per day. to run the transportation of this country
alone. We import about 7 billion barrels a day. And
that, at the prices that OPEX are charging or the
world is charging, is like exporting major
corporations, the wealth of our country. It's a
very serious problem. So I'm delighted to be the
director of the Center for Energy and Resources
and help try to develop the resources of this state
lignite, biomass, conservation. And so in that
light, I'm delighted to be the full-time
director, but I would rather stay as an assistant
director part-time and help develop programs
like I have in the past. One of the recent programs I
helped develop was a workshop that is
administered by the Engineering Experiment
Station. And it's a half million dollar summer
program being operated right now for the Gas
Research Institute out of Chicago. We have 26
scientists. They are physicists and chemists and
engineers who are assessing the potential for
developing gas supplies for this country. from
inorganic resources such as carbonates, such as
water, such as carbon dioxide. How can we develop a
burnable replacement for natural gas from those
resources? And this is a program that I helped
develop starting in January of this year. It is in
full force right now. We're required to produce a
final report by the 14th of August and We have
structured a program that involves a technical
implementation committee and a workshop
advisory panel. And I think we've done a good job. I
hope that others feel the same way. Other programs
that I've helped develop here in engineering are,
as a program developer, you have to keep your ear to
the ground and locate the problems locate the
interest of what part of the federal government or
what part of the industry is interested in helping
to solve problems. And I became aware of a program.
The awareness came about through my association
with the American Society for Engineering
Education and association with some
representatives of the Department of Defense.
About four years ago, there was a program of
Department of Defense that was proposed to
Congress to help solve the equipment problems of
universities. Equipment is a very expensive part
of a university, and maintaining modern,
current, advanced capabilities is a very
difficult thing. So they had what they called a
Defense Science and Engineering Equipment
Program, DCEP it was called. And from that, the Air
Force set aside some monies to develop a program
with industry's participation in composites.
And as a result of that, finding out the interest of
the Air Force, And having capable, competent
researchers here at A&M, we were able to put the two
together and develop a graduate program in
composites.
That's carbon and boron fibers and that sort of
thing. Composites are, of course, lightweight
replacements for metals. And the Air Force's
interest, of course, was for use in aircraft, but
automobiles can be made lighter and hence more
fuel efficient. There are many applications for
this. Another program that I was involved in
helping develop was a program to evaluate the
behavior of oil on water in the presence of waves
and in the presence of currents and in the presence
of waves and currents. That was about a million
dollar program. And from that evolved a
development of an oil spill course on how do you
collect oil from water. The American Petroleum
Institute sponsored development of this course.
It was done under the Engineering Experiment
Station and it was conducted a couple of times and
then transferred to the Engineering Extension
Service. This is an example of the evolution of
research to the teaching function and to the
continuing education function. Extension
Service now teaches about 20 courses per year to
industry to help industry control oil spills and
to contain oil spills and that sort of thing. We
also have invited people here from the Department
of Transportation. About two years ago I
sponsored a group here from the Department of
Transportation, the Coast Guard, and the
Transportation Center in Cambridge,
Massachusetts. As a result of that, several
people have been sponsored. Dr. Tom Ryan and some
others, Dr. John Painter in electrical
engineering, have evolved a program to evaluate
the global position system as a Navy satellite to
locate vessels, Coast Guard vessels in this case,
more accurately than the older systems. Dr. Don
Bray in mechanical engineering has a program on
rail transportation and non-destructive
testing. These kinds of research projects and
programs evolved from good relations with
potential sponsors, carrying the flag of Texas
A&M and helping them to know what the capabilities
of A&M are. And of course, in the final bottom line,
A&M has to produce good results or they will not be
in business next year. Our good students, our
graduates, of course, are worldwide now. and the
results of our research are going worldwide. And
it's an interesting dynamic atmosphere that it's
just, it's been a real rewarding, a very rewarding
association. I think the Texas legislatures are
doing the right thing and helping develop
engineering and other research, because that is
the basis for our future. And the future economic
well-being of this state and of this country
depends a lot on the research that's done today for
new products for tomorrow.
Dr. Bain, you said that one of the programs here
that you'd like is the co-op program. Could you
discuss that briefly? The co-op program I think is
a very fine way for a young person to develop an
association with an industry or with a company and
help pay for his education.
I think you know or perhaps you don't know that in
four and a half years a co-op student can get a
degree and pay for his degree and at the same time
develop these relationships with industry and
end up upon receiving his degree with a job and a
long-time association with a good company. Many
of the co-ops have been involved in research
programs with the Engineering Experiment
Station. When I was head of our space technology
program here, which I was until about the 1950s,
58, 57. We employed co-op students in our flight
mechanics laboratory and in our wind tunnel
program and in several of our other aerospace
research programs. We have done evaluation of
some of the thermal protective tiles for the space
shuttle. That's where you, the one on the top shelf
up there. You shoot small projectiles at those
tiles to simulate the impact of insulation as the
shuttle takes off. Co-ops were involved in that.
The co-op student, he just develops a real sense of
the purpose of industry, of the company that he's
working for, and the importance of doing good
engineering. Then he comes back to school, and he
goes to school for another semester, and then he
goes back to work again. And he comes back in the
summer program, and he has to go full-time, work,
study, work, study, for four and a half years. But
when he gets out, he's a real engineer. This
program, of course, is now university-wide. It
went from engineering under Dr. McGuire, Dean
McGuire. He didn't have his doctorate. What was
his first name? Mickey. John. John McGuire. M.C.
or M.A.C.? M.C. McGuire. He was the assistant dean
for engineering until he retired here about three
years ago. He developed the co-op program here in
engineering, which then evolved to agriculture,
then it evolved to science, and now it's
University of Lyon. He did a beautiful job. Could
you tell us something briefly, Dr. Payne, about
the quality of the engineering student as a whole
since you've been here for the last 10 years? Have
you seen any changes in the quality? Has the
quality gone down, up, or stayed about the same?
Well, I think the quality of the students has gone
up. I hope the quality of our education can stay up.
How selective are you in recruiting students into
engineering? well of course that's on the
academic side of the house and that's their
responsibility but the requirements for entry
have been increased the sat score is now i've
forgotten what it is but it's gone up from in the
last 10 years as part of being more selective of the
students coming in and of course also as part of
some effort to maintain a top limit on engineering
enrollment. I've seen engineering enrollment go
from 3,000 students to above 11,000 students. And
this next fall, it's expected to be about 12,000
students. The quality of the students is good. The
SAT requirements have gone up. A number of
students come here to take engineering because
they hear that A&M is a tough school. They want the
challenge of a tough education. They also come
here because their daddies were Aggies. They come
here because they hear good things about A&M
graduates. They hear about the Aggie spirit. They
hear about the professionalism of professional
engineers. They hear about the fact that they can
get a job. Graduates of A&M and the College of
Engineering have no problem whatsoever in having
a choice, usually, This job or that job, they have
several offers, most many of them do. And their
salaries are good. So I think that young people are
accepting the challenges of a tough education.
They're dynamic. They've got many problems yet to
be solved in this world. We old folks haven't
solved them all. There'll be plenty of problems
around in the future to be solved. I just think the
quality of the graduates is great. Otherwise,
industry wouldn't come here. What about the large
number of foreign students coming here? What do
you think motivates them to come here? The same
reasons? The reasonableness of the cost of
education. The same reasons. You're right. We
have a large number of foreign students. There's a
problem there. They don't pay the full cost of
their education. We are a state university. We are
paying part of the cost of educating every student
that goes through here. So you can say that the
taxpayer is helping to pay for the education of
foreign students. Now, that's not to say that
foreign students are not making contributions to
this country, because they are. Many of our
leading scientists are foreign students. And
let's face it, our ancestors at one time came from
another country. So at one time we were farm
students in that trailer. But it is a problem
because of the financing requirements. How do you
pay for the education of these people? We're
paying for it. Is there anything else that we need
to touch on that we have on? No, I'll just say that I
believe that A&M is great. I believe that carrying
the flag of Texas A&M to the Washington seat and to
industry is a very gratifying job. I think that
whoever is assigned as assistant director for
program development in the future I hope has got
the kinds of background and experiences with the
government and with industry and with the
research and development. I hope he has had a
background of experience in research and
development. and that he can help bring great
things to this university and the total system.
Well, Dr. Maynard, it's been a pleasure
interviewing you, and I appreciate very much your
patience and kindness. Well, Billy, I appreciate
your approach to this whole thing, and I want to
wish you all the success in the world. I think you do
a good job.
Thank you. Oh.
Oh.